NEWS
====

This file describes user visible changes to QM.

QM 2.0
======

Tests are no longer run in a random order by default.  To run tests in
a random order, you must now use the "--random" option to "qmtest run".

QMTest now has a "ProcessTarget" target class that can be used to
run tests in parallel on systems that do not support threads.

QMTest now requires that all extension classes be listed in the
classes.qmc file in the directory that contains the extension class.

New command-line options:
-------------------------

QMTest now has a "--version" option.

The "qmtest run" command now has a "--rerun" option to rerun only
those tests which had unexpected outcomes when the tests were last
run.

The "qmtest run" command now has a "--random" option to run the tests in 
a random order.

The "qmtest extensions" command can be used to list the available
extension classes.

The "qmtest register" command can be used to register new extension 
classes and to try loading an extension class.

The "qmtest help" command is a synonym for "qmtest --help".

The "qmtest run" and "qmtest gui" commands now use a file named
"context" in the current directory as a context file if no explict -C
option is provided.

QM 1.1.5
========

When loading a test, resource, or database class, the directory
containing the extension class is placed at the front of the path used
to search for modules.  In previous versions of QMTest, it was placed
at the back.

QM 1.1.4
========

The QMTest GUI no longer crashes when the "Cancel" button is hit when
creating a new test suite.

Commands like "qmtest create-tdb --attribute X=Y" where "Y" contains
spaces are now handled correctly.

QM 1.1.3
========

The "-c" option to "qmtest run" did not work correctly in QM 1.1.2.
This problem has been corrected.

QM 1.1.2
========

QM is now licensed under the GNU General Public License.

The QMTest GUI has been substantially improved.

It is now possible to load and save the context in the GUI.

Numerous small bugs have been fixed.

QM 1.1
======

QMTest now works on systems that do not have support for threads, or,
more precisely, when using a Python interpreter for which "import
thread" fails.

The Makefiles and build tree have been reorganized so as to make
installation from source simpler.

QMTest should now build on Debian GNU/Linux without configure options.
